#Tidy Data Code Book

The data set is from the UCI Machine Learning Repository, from an experiement entitled [Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones). The study was designed to see if it would be possible to predict the activity a person in performing, based on data from accelerometers and gyroscopes given by wearables like smartphones. There were a total of 30 participants, who performed 6 pre-defined activities while being monitored. All variables in the tidy data set, with the exception of `subject`, and `activity`, are the mean of the features related to mean and standard deviation of measurements by the sensors for each subject, on each activity.
For more information on the features measured, please refer to the "features.txt" and "features_info.txt" files under the root directory of the raw data set;

#Transformation Process

The initial raw data was split into 2 sets, training data and testing data, each located in separate folders, `test` and `train`. The training data comprised about 70% of the measured data, and the testing data was the remaining 30%. The task was to merge the two sets into one, and summarise the mean of those measurements that represented means and standard deviations, according to subjects and activities. So in the final data set, each measurement/feature is actually an average for a particular subject on a particular test. 
The following steps were taken to arrive at the tidy set:

**Step 1**:
Each data group, training and testing, were loaded separately. There were 5 files needed for this: 
  - Features data file (`./{group}/X_{group}.txt`): has measurements of 561 features, in one vector per row, for all subject on all activities for the group (test or train)
  - Activity files (`./{group}/y_{group}.txt`): lists the activities corresponding to the feature measurements on the features data file
  - Subject file (`./{group}/subject_train.txt`): lists the subjects corresponding to the feature measurements on the features data file
  - Activity labels (`./activity_labels.txt`): has the names (labels) of the activities monitored
  - Features labels (`./features.txt`): has the names of the features measured

**Step 2**
Since there were no relational keys/variables between these files, they were merged based on row index. The first 3 files, features data, activity, and subject were combined to form a data frame with the subject id, activity, and features measurements.

**Step 3** 
The values from the activity label file were used to replace the numeric values of activities for their textual form, e.g. 1 replaced by "WALKING". And the column names for the features were generated by applying the `make.names` to the features labels file values.

**Step 4**
The 2 tables, for training and testing, were combined into one using the `rbind` function. 

**Step 5**
The data frame was filtered, to remove feature columns that were not measurements of mean or standard deviation. The keywords "mean", "std", "subject" and "activity" were used to determine columns of interest. This was based on observation of labels on the `features.txt` , and notes on the `features_info.txt` file.

**Step 6**
A tidy data set was generated, by aggregating the mean values of the remaining features, grouped by the subject and activity. The `aggregate` was applied to the data set to achieve this.

**Step 7**
The tidy data set was saved to a file, using the `write.table` function, with the following parameters:

```r
write.table(tidyDataSet, file="tidyDataSet.txt", row.name=FALSE, fileEncoding="UTF-8")
```

